I have the pleasure of talking to Bob Lacey, an old
colleague, and want to chat with him about his
experiences as one of the key people at A&M for a
number of years. First, Bob, give us a brief
summary of your biography up until you go to work at
A&M. Where did you grow up? When did you get to A&M?
What did you major in? And so forth. Okay. Well, I
grew up in Centerville, Texas. Born October 6,
1937. Went to public school in Centerville.
Centerville is a small community of about 800
people in Leon County. How many in the senior
class? 28 in the senior class. I remarked there,
we've never been anywhere. Chartered a bus to New
Orleans and had our senior trip down there and was
evicted out of two hotels in three days.
But I graduated from high school in 1956 and came to
Texas A&M in the fall of 1956 and majored in
mathematics, which I got my degree in. Graduated
in three and a half years, finished in January of
1960. I really didn't know what I wanted to do, and
my father, having been in the school business when
he was a young man, he said, look, I always feel that
a teaching certificate's a good thing for a person
to have that particularly doesn't know what they
want to do. So I stayed an extra semester and picked
up the education courses that qualified me for a
teaching certificate. I left A&M in the fall of 60
and went down to Cypress Fairbanks High School. I
taught math there for two years and decided that I
wanted to get a graduate degree, primarily in the
field of educational administration because I
thought that I might make public school a career.
And I received a leave of absence. from Tractor's
Firebank, which I'm still on. And I came to A&M and
needed some help in getting the finances for the
master's degree. So I went over and knocked on Dr.
Klippel's door. Dr. Klippel was head of the math
department at that time. This would have been in
the fall or the summer, rather, of 1961. And he
said, yeah, we can use you as a teaching assistant.
So they gave me a teaching assistant job, and I
enrolled in the Master of Education
Administration program. And I was a teaching
assistant for two years, I believe, and graduated
with my degree in 1963. And I still didn't know what
I wanted to do, so Dr. Clipple indicated that I'd
done a good job for him. He said, look, would you
like to be put on as an instructor? I said, well,
sure. So he gave me an instructor job. And I was one
of the few that had the good fortune of being housed
in Bagley Hall in my office. Bagley, you remember
where Bagley was? But describe it for those who...
Well, Bagley Hall was located over about where
the... in the area where the Harrington Building
is, or a little bit north of there, actually. And
that's where the water tower was located on
campus. And it was an old brick building, two
stories, that had been there
forever. Just like that building in the scene. And
in the fall, excuse me, in the fall of 1964, After I
finished my degree, I got a telephone call one day
from Mr. Heaton, who was in the registrar.
No, no, no. You were getting a call from Mr. Heaton?
Oh, yeah. In December of 64, I got a telephone call
from Mr. Heaton. and said that my name had been
recommended to him as a possible replacement for
an assistant registrar in the records section,
and he'd like to talk to me. So I go over before the
Christmas holidays and sit down and visit with
him, and they had this opening, and he said, you
have been recommended to me by the chairman of your
master's committee and a couple of the committee
members, which might be a possibility. And I'd
like to talk to you about the job. Well, what the job
entailed was maintaining the records of all of the
students and the former students, the academic
members, the former students, me and him. And it
came quite a shock to me because I'd never done
anything like this. I was really looking kind of
forward to maybe getting back to the Cypress
Firebank area in the second year or so. Anyway, I
told him, I said, look, I need to think about this. I
really don't know. I'm going off on a deer hunt down
in South Texas, and while I'm out there in the
woods, well, I'll be thinking. So I did, and what
really had me puzzled was I knew nothing about any
kind of administration. I worked in basically
agriculture and teaching school. That's about
all I've done. But anyway, I thought about it for a
long time, and I came back and I talked to two or
three of my old professors around here, and they
said, look, it's an opportunity to take it. It
doesn't work out. So I accepted the job and went to
work in the registrar's office at the Central
Registrar February 1, 1965. How much was that
beginning salary? The beginning salary was,
well, I was making $600 a month in the math
department, And I was promised my same amount of
money when I got over to the administration. But my
first check, my salary was cut from $600 to $550 a
month. And I never did really know the reason for
that. But anyway, that was the wishes of the
administrator in charge. And so I was happy with
that. Describe the admissions and records staff
and function when you joined? Okay, the entire
operation was housed in the Richard Koch building
on the first floor north side across the hall from
the fiscal office and we occupied the basement,
commonly referred to as the catacombs. We
occupied half of the basement, actually. So we had
half of the basement and half of the first floor. At
that time, we had a registrar and director of
admissions. Mr. Eaton carried both times. And we
had an associate registrar, Ray Perriman, and an
assistant registrar, Bob Lacey. And we had one
excuse me, at that time we did not. Mr. Eaton was
handling all of the admissions with the exception
of Caroline Mitchell. Caroline Mitchell was an
assistant director of admissions and she was in
charge among many other duties she had. She was in
charge of all the transfer, the undergraduate
transfer. Reckon how many years of experience of
A&M those people represented? At that time I'd say
close to a hundred. Because they'd all been here.
Because they'd all been there for a long, long,
long time. Describe their personality and their
each of them and their style of doing the job. Mr.
Heaton was a very, very kind and considerate
gentleman to work for. I found him as far as
supervision with me, which I like very much. He
expected us to get our job done, yet he didn't
constantly
stay close to us. He gave me a job and we were to do it,
and we did it. He always gave us the strong support
and the backup that we needed. Caroline Mitchell
was a very strong-willed personality lady.
Caroline had a number of functions, and this will
probably shock you when you think about what we
have today, but not only was she in charge of the
transfer students, she was in charge of building
the master schedule of classes. She was the editor
of the catalog. She assigned all of the classroom
teaching space on the campus. And she ran the
summer orientation, the freshman orientation
conferences. She had two clerical type . Mr.
Perriman was the associate registrar, and of
course I reported to him for a while. And his basic
responsibilities had to do with the overall
operation of the registrar's office related to
the record section. And I guess his main
responsibility, which was quite heavy in those
days, was the residency factor. hadn't
determined whether or not a student was to have
residence, had state residency, or whether to be
classified as a resident. And then he was also,
over
all the clerical functions that aided him,
residency as well. And also he was in charge of
graduation, too. I forgot about that, which at
that time was quite a chore because of the way in
which he was. The enrollment at Texas A&M in 1965,
if my memory serves me correctly, was somewhere, I
think, around 8,000
to 10,000, maybe 12,000. I'm not too certain about
that. We hadn't grown a whole lot. We were coming
out of the era of all-male, all-military change in
1963, so a few years after that. Who did the
admissions? Mr. Heaton did most of the
admissions. Shortly after I came, they did hire
another admissions assistant. It was a fellow by
the name of Bob Gleason. Bob handled the freshman
undergraduates, and Caroline handled the
transfer students. Of course, as you well know,
graduate admissions, although our office was
responsible for the record keeping of the
applications of Bob and Lewis and all that sort of
stuff, that determination was made in the
graduate college. Now, all of the technological
work was done on typewriters then? All of it. All of
it. Was some of it done by hand still? No. Well, when
I came there, the posting of the academic record, I
assume that's basically one of the main things.
The posting of the academic record was done by
punch cards down at the computer center, being
generated on each student after the professor
turned in their grades. The grades at that time
were turned in on IBM cards, but they were written
in. In other words, Joe Doe in Math 102, Section
500, the professor would put his grade on there and
sign his name. And also at that time, we kept
absentees on all of our students. Those IBM cards
were then key punched. at the computer center. The
data punched in, geared to the student
identification number, and then were sorted in
order of the student's name. And all of these were
taking six courses and they all came together
under his name. And at that time, all of the
permanent academic records were transported to
the computer center by means of the assistant
registrar And at night, these were run, and you'd
have to stay there for security reasons. And each
one of these things were then printed on the
student's academic record. Quite a horrendous
task. And one of the first things that I got
interested in was a faster and better way to do
that. So I was able to do a lot of visitations and
whatnot, find what they call a heat transfer
posting method. And that permitted us then to have
a carbon tape run at the computer center after
these shorts were made. And then we could post the
records in our office, and that stopped us from
having to take them out. And it was done in one
swoop, one stamp, and the entire semester was on
the students' records. How long did that run take?
To do it by heat transfer, we could do it in about
three or four days, as opposed to about two weeks of
what they were doing earlier. And obviously that
speeded up the delivery of transcripts that
students were in great need for at the end of the
semester. We started to give much faster
turnaround on our transcripts. One thing that I
think might be interesting in this that I forgot to
tell you when I was hired, the reason that I was
hired was that the assistant registrar that was in
charge, or that had the position that Mr. Heaton
talked to me about, had taken a bribe from some of
our foreign students at that time to change
grades.
And in time this surfaced and charges were brought
against the Assistant Registrar and there was a
trial and he was given a suspended sentence I think
for five to six years. Mr. Rutter, of course, was
the president of the university at that time. And
when Mr. Heaton made the offer to me, he told me that
there would be a complete investigation of my
background from day one until now, now being in 65.
And I said fine. I thought I could withstand that.
Several years after that, after I got to know a lot
of people around there, particularly the folks
over at security, Chief Ed Powell, who was chief of
security at that time, and I were having coffee one
day, and he said, Bob, he said, I know you real well
now, and he said, I'm going to tell you something.
He said, what's that? He said, Mr. Rutter ordered
an investigation of you by the FBI, the Texas
Department of Public Safety, the Brazos County
Sheriff's Department and our security here, and
said in all those years from date of birth until
1965, we found that you had a speeding ticket
issued to you between Austin and San Antonio in
1957. I said, that is correct. And so it was quite a,
obviously, Mr. Rutter, this caused the
university a lot of embarrassment, as you can well
imagine. So he wanted to be sure and having, as you
well know, the military background he had, I think
that made it even more important to him that this
check be done. All of us that knew Mr. Heaton knew
him as a very special person. When did he begin his
work with the university? Do you know? I think it
was in the very late 30s or early 40s. Mr. Heaton got
his undergraduate degree, I believe, at Stephen
F. Austin State University in Nacogdoches, and he
came here to get a master's degree. He was enrolled
in a master's program here, and I believe began
work in the registrar's office at that time, and
was hired I am not I'm not certain that he came as an
assistant or if he just had part-time work but I
believe he followed a man named Charlie Friday as a
regular guard so late 30s or early 40s for me as a
junior faculty member in the 60s I thought
apparently he had come at the beginning of time
well it seemed like he's been here forever right I
never saw him without a tie on, his shirt and tie. I
never thought of him as engaging in much small
talk, but I never was around him when he wasn't
pleasant. Always pleasant. You're absolutely
correct. As a matter of fact, the few times that I
saw Mr. Heaton without a coat and tie on, I felt like
he was somewhat undressed. uh he just he didn't
look right he looked like a person that wore
glasses all the time and didn't have them on
sometimes
deeply religious man very very religious very
heavily involved in the first magic church and
pride and likewise his wife also uh very kind i
suppose if i had a Mr. Heaton had many, many
qualities, good qualities. I suppose if I had to
fault him, and he and I talked about this from time
to time, and I think it's one of the things that he
admired about me, and you know how direct I am, and
sometimes that's gotten me into trouble, but Mr.
Heaton would avoid, he did not like controversy,
and he would do everything he could to avoid it, in
my opinion, to a fault, because I felt at times that
He should have said, look, I've got to draw the
line, and this is the way it's got to be, and that
sort of thing. And maybe that was from his
upbringing, his religious background, or
whatever. He did, in my opinion, I felt like he did.
Maybe, for a better word, he got Steve Rosen. Now,
as you started out, did you get any
indoctrination, any training? As a new
professional member of the staff? Haskell, when I
walked in that office, which was located in the
basement, that's where the record section was at
that time, and looked at that desk, I felt like I
should go upstairs and resign immediately
because when this man was terminated for his acts,
everything was left and then you see it had been
like three months and they didn't have anybody
that was there as a supervisor mr perriman was
doing the best he could but he was spread real thin
with his other job and uh it was more or less you know
here it is you've got to straighten it up and we can
help we'll help you if you can so Not to be critical,
but it would just get in there and roll your sleeves
up and try to figure out what needs to be done. It was
in a mess, and it took quite a bit of time to get it
organized. I've always been fortunate in my
entire work at A&M. Fortunate in the sense that if I
looked good, it was because I had good people that I
was surrounded by. And I had wonderful clerical
ladies there that They were looking for someone to
give them some direction and they were ready to
work. Now, a typical Heaton work week, what was,
how long did he, what time, what time did he get
there and leave? Mr. Heaton would be there
sometimes, most mornings between 7 and 7.30 and he
would leave between 6 and 6.30. uh always if he took
a lunch hour unless he had some kind of a lunching
engagement and he went home every day for lunch if
he could of course he had his wife her health was not
good and he would go home to look in on her but he used
to always tell me that what made his day was that he
could go home have a great bite to eat. He could
stretch out in his Strider lounger and get 15
minutes of a nap. But he was back at 1 o'clock every
single day. Now, he reported directly then to...
At that time, he reported to Wayne Heidel. No, he
reported to Bill Graff. Bill Graff. Bill had a
title at that time of Dean of Instruction. I assume
if you had to... acquainted with today, it would be
somewhat near a provost position, although the
provost today has much wider responsibilities.
But he was the number two man at the university at
that time. Dr. Graff was fully directed to the
president. Alright, now does Wayne Hall follow
him? Wayne Hall, let's see, Dr. Hall was not Dean of
the Graduate College at that time. I believe Paul
Trotter. All right, Hall would be later Vice
President of Academic Affairs and Dean of the
Graduate College. And Bill Barzak was his number
two, and I worked halftime up there. That's
correct. That came after. Okay, after. That came
after, yeah. So Mr. Heaton and the staff reported
to Graff, Graff to Rutter. That's correct. And all
of those people, the offices were all there in the
Koch building. That's a good point. I didn't
finish while ago. The other part of the Koch
building was occupied upon the, starting with the
second floor. Mr. Rutter was in the president's
office. Southeast corner. Exactly. And then on
the southwest corner of that building was where
Dean Graff was, or Bill Graff was. Across the
hall... Directly across the hall from the
entrance into Dr. Grant's office was the faculty
room. And the faculty room was where large
meetings were held, but it was primarily for the
academic council. The academic council at that
time was made up of all the presidents, the deans,
and the department heads. And I guess it would be
somewhat of a forerunner to the faculty senate.
Now, who else was down on the first floor? And on
the, let's see, who was in the office?
You know, there's another office up there where
Howard Wester was. Remember where Howard was? Who
was in that office? Was that the graduate dean? The
graduate dean, that's correct, the graduate
dean. Then down on your floor? Down on my floor on
the south half of the first floor was the fiscal
office. And that's where Clark Diebel and his
staff, plus they occupied the basement directly
under that on the south side of the building. All
right. Share with me from the 60s, if you can, had
the first black students gotten here Of course,
when I was in school here, there were no blacks at
all. The first time that I can recall of blacks was
about 1964-65.
There was no discussion whatsoever that I was
aware of about their admission. As I understand,
Mr. Rutter called the Pentagon, and the Pentagon,
at his request, when they sent that year's group of
enlisted Army to work on their degree at Pentagon
expense, some of them were black, and they began in
summer school. I believe that is correct. Wasn't
that under the National Science Foundation
program? I think so. And that Mr. Heaton was told by
Rutter, so I understand, to call each faculty
member a day in advance and say, tomorrow when you
meet class, you will have a black student there.
Don't worry. There is no reason this student has
been admitted, is fully competent. And there was
not a single problem. And so when the fall semester
began, nobody could say it wouldn't work. It
worked nicely that summer. I can't respond to the
calling that you indicated, Mr. Heathman. I'm not
aware of it. Having not been in admissions at that
time, I could have been certainly left out of that.
I can tell you that there were absolutely no
incidents. Yeah, I never heard of it. The only
incident that I'm aware of, and this was some
couple of years or so after the time period you're
talking about, was the One night in the library
there were some blacks who had checked out some
books and there was something very minor about how
they returned the books or that sort of thing. Very
little talk and no demonstrations of any kind that
I'm aware of at all. All right. What about some
anecdotes about the admission of women gradually
becoming more and more inclusive? Do you remember
any? Well, one of the main things that I remember
was that, as you well know, at that time, all of our
registrations were being held in Subesa's dining
hall. And there was a card in the registration
packet that the females had to sign. And it had to be
notarized by someone in the line of registration.
We would hire eight, ten notary publics. It would
be right at the end of the exit of Subesa, and the
student left to turn their packet in. And on those
cards would be questions like, do you solemnly
swear that you are a daughter of a faculty or a staff
member, and that you cannot find this program at
any other institution in the United States, and I
don't know two or three other things. So I remember
that side of it. After the 1963
And when Mr. Runner made his decision, you know,
there were dislikes from the admission of women to
Texas A&M. You could know, I think, about the
stories of former students that were unhappy and
some of them took their Aggie rings off and didn't
wear them again, that sort of thing. But
internally in the office, no discussion. No
discussion at all about it. I think it was accepted
that It took a while for the female enrollment
to grow, but I don't recall any. Okay, now let's
move on forward with your career as your duties
tell me about how they grew and personnel changed.
Well, in 1967, I guess, yeah, two years after I'd
been there, I was talking with Mr. Heaton
constantly all this time about we have to do
something with Mr. Heaton. Mr. Heaton, bless his
heart, was not of the computer age. Back to your
earlier statement about a lot of it was being done
by hand. It was basically all being done by hand.
And there had been a horrible relationship
between the Office of Admissions and Records and
the Data Processing Center. There was some bad
feeling there. Most of it was done prior to my time,
so I can't give you a whole lot of history about it,
except I do think that part of it was simply because
of the bid. The individuals that were there, that
had been there for so many years and had been doing
it a particular way, simply bucked them. They
didn't want to change. And they didn't want to
change a lot, I think, because they had not had the
good fortune to have been educated in what
computers could do. And so
part of my A good number of my responsibilities, of
course, was working with the data processing
center. And I'll never forget the first time I
walked in that building down there. It was ice. I
mean, it was obvious to me immediately that there
was some real problems between our office and the
computer center. I worked hard down there, and I
had taken computer courses myself, so that helped
my relationship with the computer center, and
particularly Bob Smith, who was the director of it
at that time. I got well acquainted with him and
told him that this is my mission, this is what I want
to do, and I'm working on the other end up here with
Mr. Eaton to get this done. And so Bob Smith often
referred to me as being... their salvation in the
registrar's office. So it took me a while, but we
got that.